Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we will learn the simplest way of going live with a WordPress website.
Without further ado, let's get started.
OK, so first I want you to visit our fictional university Web site, OK?
And at the moment, this website lives within your local dev environment, which means you are the only
person on the planet that can view it.
So our goal in this video is to learn how to push this website up onto the Web, onto our Web hosting
account so that it's public and the entire world can view it.
And the first step towards making that happen is to jump in to the admin dashboard.
And just to be clear, this is the admin dashboard that we've been working with throughout this entire
course.
Right.
This is our fictional university, local dev environment, admin dashboard.
And throughout this course, we've spent a lot of time creating all sorts of different posts spread
out across the different posts types, as well as customizing different settings and user roles and
user accounts.
So the idea is that we don't want to have to manually recreate each one of those posts and settings
on our Web hosting WordPress installation.
Right.
That would take forever.
So instead, we want to bundle up and export all of our data and all of our files so that we can import
all of that within our Web hosting copy of WordPress.
Now, you might have noticed that if you hover over tools in the sidebar, WordPress does have a native
import and export feature.
However, it's fairly basic and it will not include all of your data, nor will it include all of your
files.
So instead of the native import and export feature, we need something that's more exhaustive, something
that's more holistic.
So right now, I want to show you one of my all time favorite plug ins.
So in the sidebar, hover over plug ins and click add new.
Let's use the top right search field and search for all dash in one WP migration.
And here it is, all in one migration as of this moment, it has 700000 active installs and it's created
by Serv Mask.
I'm sure a lot of these other similar plug ins are great as well.
But from my own personal experience, I've had excellent luck with this plugin.
So it's the one that I'm going to recommend.
OK, so let's go ahead and install now.
And then activate.
And with the new plug in activated, we now see this new option in the sidebar, all in one WP migration,
and you see it gives us options of export, import and backups.
For now, we are interested in export.
So you can either click that or just click on the main sidebar item.
And from this screen, it's very easy to bundle up or export our site so that we can move it to our
hosting account.
However, before we do bundle it up.
I do want to show you how to ignore certain unnecessary files.
For example, if you jump to our text editor of our theme folder, in particular, we have this folder
named Noad Underscore Module's, and this is a very large folder with many, many megabytes of files.
Now, while these files are necessary on our local computer because we are the developer, these files
are absolutely not necessary for the public version of our website.
So there's no sense in bloating the bundled file that this plugin will create for us with all of these
unnecessary node modules.
So right now, I want to show you how we can tell this plugin to ignore a certain folder within our
theme folder.
We just jump in to our theme's functions file.
You can do this anywhere, but maybe down at the very bottom of the file, let's say ad underscore filter.
For the first argument, let's say quotes, and this needs to be a I one, W.M., underscore, exclude,
underscore, content, underscore from underscore export.
So I didn't make up this name.
The creators of that all in one migration plug in created this filter name.
And now for the second argument, we just give it a function, let's make up a name and then we can
create this function in just about 10 seconds from now.
Let's call it ignore certain files.
Be sure to end this line with a semicolon.
OK, and now on a new line, let's just create a function with that matching name.
So function ignore certain files, parentheses, curly brackets in the parentheses for our function,
let's say dollar sign, exclude underscore filters and then in the body of our function, let's say
dollar sign, exclude underscore filters, square brackets right after that equals and then a pair of
quotes and now we just point towards the node modules folder.
Now this path is relative from our WPE content directory.
So we're actually going to begin with looking inside the themes folder.
And then the name of our theme is fictional Dasch University Dash Theme Slash.
And then we say Noad Underscore Module's OK, be sure to end this line with a semicolon on a new line
still within the body of the function here, let's say return and then we're just going to return.
Exclude filters of dollar sign, exclude underscore filters, semicolon.
Let's save this file.
And now back in the admin, when we're viewing the plugin export screen, we're absolutely ready to
export to a file and all we need to do is click on this export to menu.
And let's choose file, so export to the first option file, and now the plugin is working its magic,
so it's bundling together everything.
We need a copy of our WordPress database, all WordPress system files, all of our theme files, any
and all plug ins we've installed and any photographs we've uploaded through the WordPress media system.
And once it completes, then we want to download that bundled file.
So just click this animated button to download it, OK?
And now if I check my computer's downloads folder, here is that brand new file that the plug in just
created.
So this one convenient file contains my entire WordPress website.
It contains the hundreds or probably thousands of individual files that make up WordPress, as well
as any of our assets and our entire database.
So now all we need to do is import this one file within our Web hosting copy of WordPress.
So back in the Web browser, open up a new tab and jump to your Web hosting site.
Let me explain what I mean by this or what I'm referring to here.
So every Web hosting company is different, but they all make it easy to create a new WordPress project.
They usually have some sort of one click WordPress installer.
So if you want to follow along with this lesson, you can pause the video right now and go into your
Web host and just set up a new default, fresh copy of WordPress, perhaps on a subdomain like practice
your domain dotcom or testing your domain dotcom.
Essentially, we just want a WordPress site, even if it's empty up on the Web that we want to overwrite
and transform into our fictional university site that we just exported.
And let's go ahead and jump into the admin dashboard of this copy of WordPress.
So all we need to do now is install that same migration plug in.
Except now, instead of exporting, we want to import.
So in the sidebar, plug ins, add new.
In the top right search bar, I will search for all in one WP migration.
Here it is, go ahead and install.
And then activate.
OK, in the sidebar, we now have this new option, all in one migration, this time I'm going to click
import, right?
We just want to import that convenient bundle file from our local dev environment.
So I believe you can literally just drag this file onto this open area.
Or if you're not a drag and drop kind of person, just click this import from menu.
Choose File.
Navigate to your computers downloads folder and choose our bundle file.
That could take a few minutes to upload.
So while we have some downtime, I will point out that this plug in is completely free as long as your
bundle file is under 512 megabytes or in other words, as long as you didn't upload tons and tons of
high resolution photographs within your local dev copy, you should be all right.
If you are over this file size limit, do not feel like you need to purchase this plug in.
Instead, you might just want to challenge yourself and try out the more advanced path B that we will
cover in the next lesson.
This message is just letting us know that this is going to completely overwrite and erase any and all
data and files that currently live on this website.
So long story short, we only want to use this import feature on a relatively new and empty WordPress
installation that doesn't contain any content that we care about.
OK, so just to be clear, before you click proceed, make sure that there's not anything on this website
that you care about that you haven't already backed up.
So in my case, since I'm working with a brand new, clean, fresh installation of WordPress on my Web
host, I know that I'm safe to click proceed.
Cool, we see a success message, and it's letting us know that in order to guarantee that all of our
permalink work properly, we should jump into the permalink settings screen and click save twice.
And that will be sure to clear out any of the old permalink cash.
So I click close and now you'll notice that if I hover over settings in the sidebar and try to click
on Permalink.
Even though I was logged in five seconds ago, now it's asking me to log in again, this is because
that import process just deleted the existing database and imported a copy of the database from our
local dev environment.
Obviously uploaded all of our files, too, because you can see that this is using our custom colors
and in branding.
Cool.
Now, I do want to point out that you need to use your username and password that you set up at the
very beginning of this course within your local dev environment.
So in other words, now our Web host copy of WordPress is an identical copy from our local dev environment.
OK, so whatever username password combo you've been logging into WordPress with throughout this entire
course, be sure to use that here, OK?
And once you log in, let's be sure to navigate to the settings permalink screen.
We don't need to make any changes, we just want to click the blue save changes button and I'm pretty
sure just clicking at once will do the trick.
But the plug in did ask us to do it twice, so I will click it again.
And that should guarantee that any of the old permalink cash is fully cleared.
Cool.
Now, if I use this link up in the top left to visit the front end of our website.
Awesome, so this is now live up for the entire world to view now before we bring this lesson to a close,
you might be wondering how can you make edits or changes to our theme files?
So, for example, on our homepage, this large welcome headline, this text does not live in our database.
Instead, it lives in one of our files.
Now, if we were trying to edit our local dev copy of WordPress instead of our live Web hosting copy,
we could just jump into our text editor and within our theme folder, jump into front dash page.
And here's the heading level.
One says welcome.
But if we edit and save this file, that's only going to update our local dev website.
So the question becomes, how can we access and edit the copy of this file that is powering our live
Web site?
Well, the answer to that question is going to be a little bit different, depending on which Web host
you're using.
But let me show you how we could do that within site ground.
And it will probably be fairly similar no matter which hosting company you use.
So in a separate tab, visit site, ground dotcom or whatever hosting company you're using and go ahead
and log in with your user account.
From the welcome screen, let's click on websites towards the top here, you should see your domain
listed here.
Let's click on site tools, OK, from these options, let's click on file manager from the file manager.
Let's just drill down and find our theme folder.
So go into your domain.
Then click on public HTML and then WP content, and at this point you're familiar with this folder structure,
so then we would go into theme's.
Then go and do our fictional university theme, and these are the theme files that we've been working
on throughout the course together.
Now let's get back to the actual task at hand.
So imagine we wanted to update this welcome text on the homepage to instead read hello.
So first, let's make that change locally on our computer and then I'll show you how to upload it from
within the site.
Ground file manager.
So in my text editor, if I change, welcome to Hello and Save that.
That by itself does not update our live Web site that would only update our local dev Web site.
However, back in the browser within our site ground file manager screen, we can just drag and drop
a file from our computer into this area.
So to actually find the files on our computer, you can use the local app, right?
Click on your project and Choose Revealed and Finder or show an explorer and then just dig into your
files like we've been doing throughout the course.
So that's app public web content themes, fictional university theme.
We're looking for front page.
And then I'm just going to drag and drop that file onto the site.
Ground File Manager website right here.
So as soon as I released the drag and drop we see file already exists, what do you want to do?
And I'm just going to click the overwrite button.
So we see one file was uploaded successfully.
And if I jump back to my site, Ground Domain or WordPress website and refresh perfect, we see.
Hello.
So that's one way to update a file.
Just drag and drop or within the file manager.
I can click on front page dot here.
And that opens up a minimalist editor right here in the Web browser, so I could instead change this
hello value to say hi there and then click this save icon.
And then back on my live website refresh, and there we see the change.
So that's super convenient.
However, now you have this mismatch between the local copy of the file on your computer and the copy
that lives on your public server.
But as long as you're aware of that, it's OK.
Now, I must say that neither of the two ways that we just updated that file are ideal.
Manually uploading an individual file through our Web browser is not ideal and editing the text and
code right in our Web browser is also not ideal.
Now, if you have experience with websites, you might be yelling at the screen right now saying, Brad,
why don't we just use FTP?
Well, I'm here to tell you that using FTP is also not ideal.
In fact, avoiding having to manually upload your files with FTP is the entire point of path B, right.
The more advanced path of getting your website up onto the web.
Now we have reached the end of this lesson and therefore the end of path a the simple way of pushing
your website up.
And I think the pros and cons of Pathé are clear now.
It was relatively simple and fast to move the website, but then making any sort of future updates to
the code files is not the most elegant thing in the world.
So if you have any experience with the git version control system, in our very next lesson, we are
going to review Path B for uploading and deploying a website.
Path B is a bit more advanced and complicated.
However, making future updates to code files and Path B is super easy and luxurious.
Maybe that sounds like something you're interested in.
Maybe it doesn't.
Either way, let's keep things rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.